README.MD, before:

# Allen DNA Database Scripts

## Overview

This project provides scripts to download ancient DNA data from
the [Allen Ancient DNA Resource](https://reich.hms.harvard.edu/allen-ancient-dna-resource-aadr-downloadable-genotypes-present-day-and-ancient-dna-data) and to convert it to other formats.

## Formats

### Packed ancestrymap
`.ancestrymap`: Format of the downloaded files. Storage optimized format by David Reich group. [Link](https://reich.hms.harvard.edu/software/InputFileFormats)

### Eigenstrat format
`.snp`, `.geno`: Format used by EIGENSTRAT software. [Link](https://reich.hms.harvard.edu/software/InputFileFormats)

### Variance call format
`.vcf`: Standard text format for variation data. [Link](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/training/online/courses/human-genetic-variation-introduction/variant-identification-and-analysis/understanding-vcf-format/)

## Scripts

### `download_database.py`

Downloads Eigenstrat data from the Allen Ancient DNA Database.

### `vcf2eigenstrat.py`

Converts VCF files to Eigenstrat format.

### `eigenstrat2vcf.py`

Converts Eigenstrat files to VCF format.

### `vcf_to_zarr.py`

Saves VCF data as a Zarr array.

### `rearrange_zarr.py`

Rearranges the chunking dimension of a Zarr array for machine learning.

## Convertf

The initial conversion is from packed ancestrymap to eigenstrat with the EIG C-based software.
Pull [Github for EIG](https://github.com/DReichLab/EIG).

Install dependencies
```
sudo apt install libopenblas-dev
sudo apt install libgsl-dev
sudo apt install liblapacke-dev
```
Change to `src` folder and in the `Makefile` file uncomment line 5: `override LDLIBS += -llapacke`.

Then run
```
make
make install
```

Commit message:

create bash script for ancestrymap to eigenstrat conversion. add more documentation in the readme.

README.MD, after:

# Allen DNA Database Scripts

## Overview

This project provides scripts to download ancient DNA data from
the [Allen Ancient DNA Resource](https://reich.hms.harvard.edu/allen-ancient-dna-resource-aadr-downloadable-genotypes-present-day-and-ancient-dna-data) and to convert it to other formats.

## Formats

### Packed ancestrymap
`.ancestrymap`: Format of the downloaded files. Storage optimized format by David Reich group. [Link](https://reich.hms.harvard.edu/software/InputFileFormats)

### Eigenstrat format
`.snp`, `.geno`: Format used by EIGENSTRAT software. [Link](https://reich.hms.harvard.edu/software/InputFileFormats)

### Variance call format
`.vcf`: Standard text format for variation data. [Link](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/training/online/courses/human-genetic-variation-introduction/variant-identification-and-analysis/understanding-vcf-format/)

### Zarr format
Format to store multidimensional arrays in chunks for efficient access.
Enables fast access to rows (samples) and columns (SNPs) without loading the entire table.

## Download and Conversion

### Download Ancestrymap Data

Run the `download_ancestrymap.py` script.
It downloads the ancestrymap data from the Allen Ancient DNA Database and places it in the `ancestrymap` folder.

### Convert Ancestrymap to Eigenstrat

First compile or download the `convertf` binary.
Adjust the filenames in the `config/ancestrymap2eigenstrat.params` file to match the downloaded files.
You may also have to adjust the location of the `convertf` binary.
Then run the `ancestrymap2eigenstrat.sh` script.

### Convert Eigenstrat to VCF



## Scripts

### `vcf2eigenstrat.py`

Converts VCF files to Eigenstrat format.

### `eigenstrat2vcf.py`

Converts Eigenstrat files to VCF format.

### `vcf_to_zarr.py`

Converts VCF data as a Zarr array.

### `rearrange_zarr.py`

Rearranges the chunking dimension of a Zarr array for machine learning.

## Convertf

The first conversion from packed ancestrymap to eigenstrat is done with be C-program Convertf.
Pull [Github for EIG](https://github.com/DReichLab/EIG) next to the `adna_retrieval_conversion` repo (else you'll have to adjust the convertf location in the bash script).

Install dependencies
```
sudo apt install libopenblas-dev
sudo apt install libgsl-dev
sudo apt install liblapacke-dev
```
Change to `src` folder and in the `Makefile` file uncomment line 5: `override LDLIBS += -llapacke`.

Then compile with
```
make
make install
```
